Welcome to a new episode of Ripples,
We’ll be talking today, once again, about * Free Will *
Since the topic was a bit controversial, I figured it deserves more than one episode
So, after the pervious Free Will episode, we’ll continue today with a brief chat.
And there is also another one coming soon to go into more details.
In today’s episode, we’ll discuss a video of Daniel Dennett which was shared on Ripples’ Facebook page about a month ago
In this video, Dennett discusses Free Will from an angle different from the one he used to take discussing the topic.
So, I’d like to comment on a couple of things he mentions in this video.
After hearing what he had to say, I’d like to point out a few things that, in my opinion,
made the thought experiment mentioned in the video invalid and inaccurate in our context regarding Free Will.
So, the thought experiment tells us that, after this man believes that there is a microchip implanted in his brain,
enabling the team to control all his thoughts and actions. He believed that he has no Free Will and thus became immoral.
Dennett goes on to saying that this is not different at all from what Sam Harris and other neuroscientists are doing
when they go on telling the public they have no Free Will.
The inaccuracy in the implicit claim in this thought experiment regarding our context is the following:
The real experiment he talked about showed that when subjects read a passage about how Free Will is an illusion,
they behaved immorally (cheated) in a quiz they had to take right after reading it.
But this, of course, doesn’t mean that they became immoral people for the rest of their lives.
Unlike his thought experiment, in which the man becomes quite immoral
and gets himself into trouble which lead him to court eventually.
I believe there is quite a difference between acting immorally (cheating) right after reading a passage
and becoming immoral for the rest of one’ life.
If you get angry after watching a football match in which your team lost,
is different from you becoming an angry person for the rest of your life.
So, this is why I believe the analogy wasn't accurate.
And thus, the conclusions based on the thought experiment don’t seem valid to me.
A perfect example would be his friend Sam Harris, who believes very deeply that Free Will in an illusion,
he is philosopher and neuroscientist who wrote books about the topic.
So he totally believes that Free Will is an illusion,
,and yet Dennett knows that Harris is not an immoral person.  Otherwise, he wouldn't be friends with him.
So, he knows that Sam is a moral person, which shows that he knows that
we cannot say believing that Free Will is an illusion would be a clear direct cause to making one immoral like the thought experiment implicitly suggests.
And again, this makes me believe that this thought experiment does not succeed in what it was supposed to do.
One more little detail regarding this thought experiment
If I tell you: “You and I, as humans, are a part of this natural world, which follows deterministic physical laws,
and thus our actions follows deterministic laws, be it physical factors, biological, psychological, educational, etc..
And all those factors determine your intentions, beliefs, way of thinking, behaviors, etc..
And thus, our subjective feeling of having Free Will, based on which we judge each other morally, is an illusion”
Does the previous claim, although uneasy to hear for many of us,
have the same effect on the listener as: “there is this PERSON who has a device to remotely control all your actions”?
I personally don't think so!
In his thought experiment, the neurosurgeon told him she put a microchip in his brain and will control every move he makes.
I think there is a difference between those 2 claims.
But even if we didn’t agree on this point, I believe the first point is the more important on here
And it is the one that made the thought experiment and its implications be unconvincing in my opinion.
And that’s it for today,
One more video regarding Free Will is coming soon.
In which I’ll try to clarify some things which the previous episode seemingly didn’t make clear.
That’s what some of the comments seemed to suggest.
So if there is something regarding the topic of Free Will you’d like me to cover in the coming episode,
please write it down in the comments below so we can hopefully discuss it together next time.
SUBSCRIBE to keep the conversation going regarding Free Will and other topics.
Share & Like the video if you enjoyed it.
See you in the next one.
PEACE!